John Harbaugh could have looked at two offensive linemen the Giants selected in the 2022 draft, reviewed their performance on the field the past four years, said "No thanks," and no one would have given him a hard time about it.

Instead, John Harbaugh is leaning into the clean-slate mindset he said he would have, as far as being open to working with players who someone else might have dismissed. The Giants on Tuesday brought back Joshua Ezeudu on a one-year contract, The Post confirmed, just as last week they re-signed Evan Neal to a one-year deal.

Both players endured struggles, and both will receive a second chance with the Giants.

Ezeudu, a third-round pick, played in 33 games but made only 10 starts. He spent the entire 2025 season on injured reserve with a calf issue. He was mostly a guard in college at North Carolina, but the Giants saw him as a tackle. He ended up starting seven games at left tackle, filling in when Andrew Thomas went down to injuries.

Ezeudu had plenty of rough moments.

This is a return to see if Ezeudu can find a place on the roster as a backup. He is viewed as a possible reserve at every spot on the offensive line other than center. At this point, Ezeudu is the fourth tackle, behind Thomas, Jermaine Eluemunor and Marcus Mbow.

With 14 or 15 offensive linemen expected on the 90-man training camp roster, Ezeudu will be given a chance to impress Harbaugh and new offensive line coach Mike Bloomgren.

Ezeudu, 26, has to show he can stay on the field. He missed the final 11 games of the 2023 season with a toe injury. He was playing well last summer before a strained calf put him out.

Neal, 25, turned out to be a huge draft bust. He was a consensus top-10 pick in 2022, and the Giants taking him at No. 7 was viewed as a solid selection. It turned out to be anything but. Neal started 27 games in his first three seasons but never grew into a solid right tackle. A move to guard in 2025 did not go anywhere, and he did not play one snap last season. He will try to stick around as a guard, hoping to show something to the new coaching regime.