Marc-Olivier Frappier ate a lot of roast chicken in restaurants as a kid. He liked the places just fine. Love came later in life.

From his position as chef at Joe Beef and Vin Papillon, restaurants instrumental in elevating Montreal's status as a global food destination in the 2010s, Mr. Frappier, 37, came to admire the humble restaurants that serve simple plates of roast chicken with gravy, French fries and coleslaw all over Quebec.

What locals call rotisseries and barbecues are an unlikely source of inspiration for a chef of Mr. Frappier's renown. Many are part of large chains and designed for takeout. Few are atmospheric.

Yet Mr. Frappier sees rotisseries as treasured heritage.

"They are one of the really true Quebecois restaurants that we have," he said. "I wanted to cook that food."

He does just that at Rotisserie La Lune, the restaurant he and his partners opened in December 2024, months after their other restaurant, Mon Lapin, topped an influential list of Canada's best restaurants for the second year in a row. It is a measure of Canadians' growing respect for rotisseries that one of the country's top chefs would commit to such a homage.

La Lune opened just as it became increasingly common for rotisserie chicken to be mentioned alongside poutine, smoked meat and bagels as a signature dish of Montreal. And chicken-and-gravy joints are only part of the story in Quebec's largest city. Portuguese rotisseries, known for spicy chicken and pastel de nata, are similarly revered.

"It's hard to get sick of chicken here," Mr. Frappier said. "It's part of who we are."

Vanya Filipovic and Marc-Olivier Frappier, the married co-owners of Rotisserie La Lune, which opened in December 2024.

Unlike traditional Quebec rotisseries and barbecues, La Lune roasts meat other than chicken. This is a plate of both chicken and guinea fowl, with a side of fries.

The idea for La Lune took shape on trips Mr. Frappier took to Europe with Vanya Filipovic, his wife and business partner and a celebrated sommelier. Like Mon Lapin, La Lune is a collaboration between the couple and the co-owners Jessica Noel, Alex Landry and Marc-Antoine Gelinas.

Their vision of the rotisserie as Quebec's answer to the brasserie and trattoria is underscored by the kind of soulful, intricate French Canadian cooking Mr. Frappier is known for, even if some of the dishes veer from the standard rotisserie playbook. Standout items from a January meal included guinea fowl terrine, leeks draped with smoked trout fillets and spit-roasted pork glistening under sauce charcutiere studded with sweet pickled ramp bulbs.

Recipe: Coleslaw With Dijon Vinaigrette

Equal care is taken with the typical Quebecois rotisserie items -- roast chicken, fries, coleslaw, chicken soup -- that anchor La Lune's menu. All of it pairs well with wines from the concise, thoughtful list, filled with relatively affordable bottles, primarily from France and Quebec.

"Dining out has become so expensive," Mr. Frappier said. "We think a huge part of the success of La Lune is a half chicken that feeds two people is 37 dollars."

Mr. Frappier was polishing off a 13.75 Canadian dollar (about $10) chicken leg lunch special in one of the snug booths at Chalet Bar-B-Q, a classic Montreal rotisserie and a source of inspiration for La Lune. The small restaurant, wrapped in pine paneling, serves charcoal roasted chicken and doesn't appear to have changed much since 1944, when it opened.

A chicken leg meal at Chalet Bar-B-Q, served with fries, gravy, slaw and a toasted bun, goes for 13.75 Canadian dollars at lunch. The restaurant, which dates to 1944, is a source of inspiration for La Lune.

"They have a very special way of cooking the chicken," he said. "The charcoal ovens here, you can't buy them anymore."

Many customers like the "sauce" -- it's really gravy -- served in small bowls alongside the chicken so much they order two portions, one to drink before the food arrives, according to an exhibit about Montreal restaurants on display at the McCord Stewart Museum.

Chalet is the best preserved and arguably most beloved of the old school Montreal rotisseries. That at least has been the case since 2011, when Laurier BBQ, which first opened in 1936, closed.

Laurier was one of the handful of thriving roast chicken restaurants in Montreal when Helene and Rene Leger opened the first St-Hubert Bar-B-Q in 1951. The business became synonymous with Quebecois chicken in the postwar years, when it was a pioneer with its then-novel television advertisements, promise of consistency and home delivery service that remains particularly attractive during inclement Canadian weather and important hockey games.

Jean-Pierre Leger, Helene and Rene's son, helped expand the chain through franchising after joining the family business in the late 1960s. He was the longtime chief executive when the business was sold for 537 million Canadian dollars in 2016.

Jean-Pierre Leger is a regular at La Lune. He is also the former longtime chief executive of St-Hubert, an iconic chain of Quebecois rotisseries.

Eyebrows were raised in Montreal after the business was sold to an Ontario-based restaurant group that owns Swiss Chalet, a competing -- and in the eyes of many Quebecois, inferior -- rotisserie chain, but Mr. Leger insists the deal was good for Quebec. (One hundred and ten of St-Hubert's 121 locations are in the province, according to the company's website.)

"The head office is still here," Mr. Leger said in an interview over espresso in the Plateau Mont-Royal neighborhood. "Because in Toronto, nobody speaks French."

St-Hubert's influence on Quebec's rotisserie culture is pronounced. One of Mr. Frappier's first restaurant jobs was at a location in Saint-Hyacinthe, his hometown, east of Montreal.

"Whenever I tell people I worked at St-Hubert, there's always someone else in the kitchen who will be like, 'Yeah, me too,'" he said. "It's a common thing."

Francisco Pedro Castanheira tried St-Hubert for the first time when he traveled from Ribatejo, Portugal, to Montreal for Expo 67, a World's Fair held in 1967.

"It was wild to him that you would have to dip chicken into something to give it flavor," said Glenn Castanheira, a grandson of Mr. Castanheira.

Francisco Pedro went on to introduce Portuguese chicken to Montreal. He opened Rotisserie Coco Rico, a takeout restaurant, in 1970, followed by Jano, a sit-down restaurant, in 1974. Both serve chicken with chile-hot piri piri sauce on the same block of Saint-Laurent Boulevard in a once Jewish section of Plateau Mont-Royal now known as Little Portugal.

Coco Rico helped establish Portuguese rotisseries in Montreal.

The restaurants are Montreal institutions and still operated by descendants of Mr. Castanheira, who died in 2003.

"I basically grew up behind the counter," said Glenn Castanheira, who is today the chief of staff to Soraya Martinez Ferrada, Montreal's mayor.

"When people say, 'Hey, you look familiar,' or find out that I grew up with Coco Rico, they always have a story to tell," Mr. Castanheira said.

Glenn Castanheira and Ceu Castanheira, his aunt, at Coco Rico. They are among the descendants of the restaurant's founder, Francisco Pedro Castanheira, who have worked in the restaurant and still operate it. Mr. Castanheira, the restaurant's former general manager, is chief of staff to Montreal's mayor.

The Castanheira family's restaurants helped to establish a style of Portuguese restaurant that is unique to Montreal and expanded the palate of Quebecois rotisseries. Beyond the spicy chicken, Portuguese rotisseries are distinguished by offerings like chorizo sandwiches, roast pork and pastel de nata.

Spatchcocked chickens roast in rotating cages over charcoal fires at Romados and Ma Poule Mouillee, two popular Portuguese rotisseries located a short walk from each other. George Karaglanis, who grew up working in his Greek family's Montreal deli, reopened Romados in 2021 with his wife, Vicki Eliopoulos, eight months after the original owners closed the restaurant.

"Everything is the same," said Mr. Karaglanis, who'd previously served as the restaurant's manager. "We still get fresh chickens in every day. We make our own piri piri."

A half chicken with fries and a salad at Romados, a popular Portuguese rotisserie. Pastel de nata, the Portuguese egg custard tart, is a typical item at Portuguese chicken restaurants in Montreal.

Chickens are cut to order at Romados.

A second Romados is set to open this month in Laval, a Montreal suburb. It will become part of a small but growing number of Portuguese rotisseries outside the Plateau. Campo, a modern Portuguese rotisserie, opened in downtown Montreal in 2016.

"I grew up going to St-Hubert and the rotisseries in the Portuguese neighborhood, but we wanted to bring one for people to enjoy downtown," said Sandra Ferreira, co-owner of Campo, which now has three locations. The restaurant is part of the restaurant company founded by Ms. Ferreira's father, Carlos Ferreira.

Cafe Ferreira, the family's flagship restaurant, is reopening next week after a remodeling, in time to celebrate its 30th anniversary. The upscale Portuguese restaurant was envisioned as a kind of culinary embassy, Ms. Ferreira said. "And if we're going to be ambassadors of Portuguese cuisine, we needed to have a Portuguese chicken restaurant."

But Mr. Frappier's La Lune remains committed to the classic rotisserie model he was first exposed to as a child. Mr. Leger, a La Lune regular, has helped him get the details right.

Mr. Leger offered tasting notes on La Lune's coleslaw, which was inspired by the best features of the two styles -- one creamy, the other vinaigrette -- at St-Hubert.

Mr. Frappier splits his time between his two restaurants, though it can be hard to stay away from La Lune, and the comforting sight of birds browning over flames.

"You know how they have the Netflix fireplace channel?" Mr. Frappier said. "I want a rotisserie chicken channel. I could watch it for hours."