Alex Pretti, 37, identified as man fatally shot by Border Patrol agent in Minneapolis
AFGE says video doesn't clearly show Alex Jeffrey Pretti brandishing weapon as DHS claimed in Minneapolis shooting
The American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE) identified the man fatally shot by a Border Patrol agent in Minneapolis Saturday as one of its members, Alex Jeffrey Pretti.
Pretti, a 37-year-old Minneapolis resident and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs ICU nurse, was shot during an immigration enforcement operation early Saturday targeting Jose Huerta-Chuma, an illegal immigrant with a criminal history including domestic assault for intentional conflict bodily harm, disorderly conduct and driving without a valid license.
Homeland Security officials said Pretti approached Border Patrol agents while armed with a 9 mm pistol and "violently resisted" when they attempted to disarm him.
Medics immediately delivered aid, but Pretti was pronounced dead at the site of the shooting.
State officials said Pretti had a lawful permit to carry (PTC).
Court records indicate his two-year marriage was dissolved in 2023 without children, and he did not have a criminal record, aside from minor traffic violations.
The Department of Homeland Security is leading the investigation into the shooting, with assistance from the FBI.
Pretti's father, Michael, told The Associated Press his son, a University of Minnesota graduate, started getting involved in protests after the fatal Jan. 7 shooting of Renee Nicole Good by an ICE agent, noting he was "very upset with what was happening in Minneapolis and throughout the United States with ICE."
"He thought it was terrible, you know, kidnapping children, just grabbing people off the street," Michael Pretti said. "He cared about those people, and he knew it was wrong, so he did participate in protests."
His parents said they recently told him to be careful when protesting, asking him not to "engage" or "do anything stupid."
"He said he knows that. He knew that," Michael Pretti told the outlet.
The family said they did not know about the shooting until they were contacted by a reporter and couldn't get any information from Border Patrol or local hospitals.
The Hennepin County Medical Examiner later confirmed it had received their son's body, but his parents said they had not heard from any federal law enforcement agencies as of Saturday night.
"The sickening lies told about our son by the administration are reprehensible and disgusting," the family wrote in a statement obtained by the AP. "Alex is clearly not holding a gun when attacked by Trump’s murdering and cowardly ICE thugs. He has his phone in his right hand and his empty left hand is raised above his head while trying to protect the woman ICE just pushed down all while being pepper sprayed. Please get the truth out about our son. He was a good man. Thank you."
The AFGE said, as of Saturday night, "many of the details remain unclear."
"Video of the incident is circulating on social media, and the Department of Homeland Security has publicly stated that the victim was brandishing a weapon at officers. However, based on the video currently available, that claim is not clearly established," the AFGE wrote. 
"This is an unfolding and extremely serious matter. Until we have verified facts, it is important that we refrain from speculation or drawing conclusions.
"What we do know is this: a member of our union lost their life today, and that alone is devastating. Our hearts are heavy, and we are deeply stricken by this tragedy that has befallen one of our own. Until more information becomes available, I urge everyone to remain calm and encourage peace and restraint in all communications and actions."
Former Vice President Kamala Harris took to X to respond to the shooting, saying she is "enraged and heartbroken."
"Alex Jeffrey Pretti was an ICU nurse at a VA hospital. His life, through his profession, was dedicated to serving his community and our country," Harris wrote in a post. "As so many have now seen on video, his final act before he was killed by federal agents was doing everything in his power to protect his community.
"Alex and tens of thousands of Minnesotans have boldly defended their neighbors against the murderous occupation of an American city by the federal government. I am enraged and heartbroken for Alex, his family, Minneapolis, and America."
Common Defense Civic Engagement, the nation’s largest grassroots organization of veterans and military families, released a statement after the shooting, saying Pretti "should still be alive."
"This is not normal. Yesterday, more than 50,000 Minneapolis residents joined a peaceful general strike against this authoritarian overreach. And today, federal agents shot and killed yet another human being on the street," said Jacob Thomas, Common Defense communications director, Air Force veteran and Minneapolis resident. 
"It is beyond clear that ICE and DHS are out of control. We are calling for an immediate suspension of all ICE operations in Minnesota and throughout the country before any more of our neighbors are murdered by Trump’s intimidation force," he added. 
"As veterans who swore an oath to this country and the Constitution, we call on every American to stand up against Trump’s lawlessness and reject the occupation of our beloved communities."
Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison said he shares the "intense grief and anger" that another Minnesotan was fatally shot during the Trump administration's Operation Metro Surge.
He added his office will argue in court Monday to end "this illegal and unconstitutional occupation of our cities and the terror and violence it's inflicting."
