Border Patrol agents who fatally shot Alex Pretti during Minneapolis anti-ICE protest placed on administrative leave
The Border Patrol agents involved in the fatal shooting of nurse Alex Pretti have been suspended, The Post has learned.
The move to place the officers on administrative leave is standard protocol for officers involved in a shooting, Department of Homeland Security officials confirmed.
Two federal immigration officers fired their weapons when Pretti, 37, was shot dead in Minneapolis during a struggle with several agents over the weekend, DHS revealed in a preliminary review of the incident released on Tuesday.
Neither has been identified.
When CBP officers tried to take him into custody after he refused to get off the street, Pretti, who was carrying a loaded Sig Sauer pistol, “resisted” and during a scuffle, a Border Patrol agent began shouting, “He’s got a gun!” according to the review.
Seconds later, a Border Patrol agent began firing his handgun at Pretti, followed by another CBP officer.
Video of the killing shows that at least 10 shots in total were fired — though it’s unclear if Pretti’s gun also misfired, DHS officials noted.
Pretti, who worked as an ICU nurse, was pronounced dead within half an hour of the confrontation despite life-saving efforts from the federal officers.
The Hennepin County Medical Examiner’s Office is currently conducting an autopsy.
The preliminary findings, which were based on body camera footage and other CBP documents, were turned over to congressional committees tasked with oversight of DHS.
Pretti’s death was the second shooting involving federal immigration officers in Minnesota in less than three weeks, during the Trump administration’s massive roundup of illegal migrants in the North Star state.
On Jan. 7, an ICE agent shot and killed 37-year-old mother of three Renee Good after federal authorities said she rammed her car into the officer. 
Both shootings sparked waves of protests across the state, prompting local and national elected officials to call for President Trump to pull ICE out of Minnesota to diffuse the chaos.
Amid mounting tensions, Trump sent “border czar” Tom Homan to Minnesota, putting Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem on the sidelines and leaving her future in the administration uncertain.
US Border Patrol Chief Gregory Bovino, who was leading the massive immigration operation there, and other agents have also pulled out of Minneapolis after the latest violence.
Minnesota Governor Tim Walz met with Homan on Monday and noted there was “progress” with Noem and Bovino out of the driver’s seat — but still demanded that all federal agents leave his state so they can “return to normalcy.”
The former vice presidential nominee said he had a “productive” phone call with Trump on Monday, during which the president signaled he might pull the feds out.
“Governor Tim Walz called me with the request to work together with respect to Minnesota. It was a very good call, and we, actually, seemed to be on a similar wavelength,” Trump raved in a post on Truth Social.
“Both Governor Walz and I want to make it better!,” he declared.
