President Trump on Friday ordered all federal agencies to stop using artificial intelligence technology made by Anthropic, a directive that could complicate government intelligence analysis and defense work.

Writing on Truth Social, Mr. Trump criticized Anthropic, describing it as a "radical Left AI company run by people who have no idea what the real world is all about."

Shortly after Mr. Trump's announcement, and 13 minutes after a Pentagon deadline, Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth designated the company a "supply-chain risk to national security." The label means that no contractor or supplier working with the military can do business with Anthropic. Later on Friday, OpenAI, the maker of ChatGPT, said it had reached an agreement with the Defense Department to provide its A.I. technology for classified systems.

The Anthropic designation was highly unusual, legal experts said. It stripped an American company of government work using a process previously deployed only against foreign companies considered security risks by the United States.

Anthropic said in a statement on Friday that it would challenge the move in court.

"Designating Anthropic as a supply chain risk would be an unprecedented action - one historically reserved for U.S. adversaries, never before publicly applied to an American company," the statement said, adding, "We believe this designation would both be legally unsound and set a dangerous precedent for any American company that negotiates with the government."

The company also said it had tried "in good faith" to reach an agreement with the Pentagon and supported "all lawful uses of A.I. for national security," with two exceptions.

"We held to our exceptions for two reasons," the statement read. "First, we do not believe that today's frontier A.I. models are reliable enough to be used in fully autonomous weapons. Allowing current models to be used in this way would endanger America's warfighters and civilians. Second, we believe that mass domestic surveillance of Americans constitutes a violation of fundamental rights."

For days, Anthropic and the Pentagon had been locked in an escalating dispute over how advanced artificial intelligence technology would be used and how it could aid military operations. The Pentagon demanded that Anthropic provide unfettered access to its A.I. system without the safeguards the company wanted.

Negotiations continued throughout Friday, but one person briefed on the talks said there appeared to be little urgency from the Silicon Valley firm to reach a deal.

Mr. Trump's statement, which came as the Pentagon and Anthropic were discussing a possible compromise, took Anthropic officials by surprise, according to people familiar with the discussions.

Calling the company "Leftwing nut jobs," Mr. Trump said it had made a mistake trying to strong-arm the Pentagon.

Mr. Trump announced a "six month phase out" for the Pentagon and some other agencies, which could allow for more extended negotiations between Anthropic and the Defense Department.

While some current and former American officials had expressed hope of reaching some sort of deal before the Pentagon's 5:01 p.m. deadline on Friday, Mr. Trump's comments complicated the situation.

Democratic lawmakers quickly rallied to Anthropic's side. Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee, said Mr. Trump and Mr. Hegseth were trying to intimidate a leading American company, actions that posed a risk to defense readiness.

"The president's directive to halt the use of a leading American A.I. company across the federal government, combined with inflammatory rhetoric attacking that company, raises serious concerns about whether national security decisions are being driven by careful analysis or political considerations," Mr. Warner said.

Experts criticized the development.

"This is a dark day in the history of American business," said Dean Ball, a former White House A.I. adviser for the Trump administration who now works as a senior fellow at the Foundation for American Innovation.

"The message sent by the supply chain risk designation to businesses, investors and global partners could not be worse," he added. "And on top of that, this is the most aggressive government regulation of A.I. ever taken anywhere in the world."

Defense Department officials were already criticizing Anthropic's leadership after the company rejected their latest offer to resolve the dispute. On Thursday evening, Emil Michael, a Pentagon official overseeing artificial intelligence, criticized Dario Amodei, the chief executive of Anthropic, who had earlier released a statement explaining why the company would not accept the Defense Department's latest terms.

"It's a shame that @DarioAmodei is a liar and has a God-complex," Mr. Michael wrote. "He wants nothing more than to try to personally control the U.S. military and is ok putting our nation's safety at risk. The @DeptofWar will always adhere to the law but not bend to whims of any one for-profit tech company."

On the surface, the dispute between the Pentagon and Anthropic concerns technical and contractual details about how the artificial intelligence model works and how the military could use it. But Mr. Trump's comments showed it has also become a political conflict.

The Pentagon wants its contractors to adhere to a single standard: the military can use what it buys however it wants, as long as it complies with the law. Pentagon officials have also criticized technology companies that the Trump administration has labeled "woke."

For Anthropic, a company that emphasizes both national security and technological safety, the political stakes are high.

Employees at the company have supported their chief executive's stance. In a rare moment of unity across Silicon Valley A.I. companies, employees at OpenAI and Google, both competitors of Anthropic, signed letters backing Anthropic's position.

One letter published Thursday was signed by nearly 50 employees at OpenAI and 175 at Google. It criticized the Pentagon's negotiating tactics and called on its leaders to "put aside their differences and stand together to continue to refuse the Department of War's current demands."

"They're trying to divide each company with fear that the other will give in," the letter said.

In an earlier potential compromise, the Pentagon said it had no interest in using Anthropic's model on classified systems for either mass surveillance or fully autonomous weaponry. But in rejecting that offer, Anthropic said the Pentagon's assurances were undermined by the legal language in the contract.

"In a narrow set of cases, we believe A.I. can undermine, rather than defend, democratic values," Mr. Amodei wrote. "Some uses are also simply outside the bounds of what today's technology can safely and reliably do."

The Pentagon had considered forcing Anthropic to allow use of its Claude model through the Defense Production Act, which would label the technology as critical to national security. But Mr. Trump's social media post made clear that the government intended to move on from Claude, so the Pentagon announced that the company was a supply-chain risk.

While Mr. Hegseth also announced a six-month transition period, he said his decision was final.

Experts said that using a tool meant for foreign companies against an American firm could create complications.

"The problem with using the designation of a supply chain risk is that it waters down that tool," said Jessica Tillipman, a government contracts and A.I. expert at George Washington University's law school. The Defense Department would be "transforming what is designed to be a national security tool into a point of leverage for a business use," she added.

Although many military uses of artificial intelligence are still in development, such systems are already used for intelligence analysis. Removing Claude from government computers could affect analysts at the National Security Agency who sift through overseas communications intercepts and could hamper C.I.A. analysts searching for patterns in intelligence reports.

Former officials said C.I.A. staff members are eager to continue using Claude because it has sped up their work and improved analysis. However, officials had warned that a presidential order could force the agency to find alternatives.

The Pentagon is prepared to move forward with Grok, produced by Elon Musk's xAI, on its classified systems. But current and former government officials consider Grok an inferior product, and switching A.I. software would take time and likely cause disruption.
