US President Donald Trump has said he "didn't see" part of a social media video showing a racist clip depicting Barack and Michelle Obama as apes.

The clip - set to the song The Lion Sleeps Tonight - was at the end of a video he shared containing claims about voter fraud in the 2020 election. The video was later removed.

Trump told reporters on Friday that "I didn't make a mistake" when asked whether he was going to apologise, adding that he had only seen the start of the video before it was posted by a staff member and didn't know it contained that depiction of the Obamas.

Republican Senator Tim Scott - who is black - described it as "the most racist thing I've seen out of this White House".

The White House initially defended the clip as an "internet meme video" and told critics to "stop the fake outrage".

But after fierce backlash, including from several Republican senators, the post was removed from Trump's Truth Social account and a White House official said that a staffer had "erroneously" made the post.

The clip - which recalls racist caricatures comparing black people to monkeys - appears to be taken from an X post shared by conservative meme creator Xerias in October.

That video also depicts several other high-profile Democrats as animals, including New York Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

Trump's predecessor in the White House, Joe Biden, is depicted as a monkey eating a banana.

The Obamas have yet to comment on the video.

The video was one of dozens posted to Trump's Truth Social account overnight.

"I look at a lot of thousands of things," the president said while aboard Air Force One on Friday, adding that, after watching only part of the video, he "gave it to the people who, generally, they look at the whole thing".

He said he liked the video's message on voter fraud, but that if his staff had looked at the whole thing, "probably they would have had the sense to take it down".

"We took it down as soon as we found out about it," he added.

Some criticism came from within Trump's own party.

Scott, a South Carolina Republican and an ally of Trump, posted that he was "praying it was fake because it's the most racist thing I've seen out of this White House", adding: "The president should remove it."

Another Republican, New York representative Mike Lawler, called the post "wrong and incredibly offensive - whether intentional or a mistake" and said it "should be deleted immediately with an apology offered".

The criticism continued even after the post was taken down.

John Curtis, a Republican senator for Utah, posted on social media that the video was "blatantly racist and inexcusable".

"It should never have been posted or left published for so long," he wrote.

Florida representative Byron Donalds - a longtime supporter of Trump's, who is running for governor - called the White House after the video was posted and was told that it was the work of a staffer who had "let the president down", according to CBS, the BBC's US news partner.

The BBC has contacted the White House for clarification on how many people have access to the president's account and what the approval process is for posts.

White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt said in a statement to the BBC earlier in the day that the clip was from "an internet meme video depicting President Trump as the King of the Jungle and Democrats as characters from the Lion King".

"Please stop the fake outrage and report on something today that actually matters to the American public," she added.

Before it was removed, Derrick Johnson, the president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), called the video "disgusting and utterly despicable" and accused Trump of attempting to distract the public from the Epstein case and a "rapidly failing economy".

Ben Rhodes, a former deputy national security adviser for strategic communications in the Obama White House, said: "Let it haunt Trump and his racist followers that future Americans will embrace the Obamas as beloved figures while studying him as a stain on our country."

In a short post of his own, Illinois Governor JB Pritzker said that "Donald Trump is a racist".

"Disgusting behaviour by the president," the office of California Governor Gavin Newsom wrote on X. "Every single Republican must denounce this. Now."

House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries - who himself accused Trump of racism last year after he shared an AI-image depicting Jeffries with a moustache and sombrero - responded to the recent video by calling Trump a "vile, unhinged and malignant bottom feeder".

"Every single Republican must immediately denounce Donald Trump's disgusting bigotry," he added.

The clip of the Obamas was added to the end of a minute-long video which included claims about a voting conspiracy in Michigan in the 2020 presidential election. Those claims were debunked as part of Dominion Voting System's successful civil actions against some media companies.

Trump also has a long history of criticising and attacking Obama.

Before his first term as president, Trump regularly made false claims that the Hawaii-born Obama was actually born in Kenya and therefore was ineligible to be president.

He later acknowledged that Obama was born in the US.
