In mid-2025, when the Trump administration suddenly felt compelled to downplay the Jeffrey Epstein files, officials said they didn't have enough evidence to prompt any additional investigations of third parties.

The memo didn't just say there wasn't evidence to charge anyone else, mind you; it said there wasn't even evidence to investigate "uncharged third parties."

That broad assertion in an unsigned FBI memo has proved to be a rather rash conclusion — most recently and emphatically by Thursday's arrest of Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor, the former Prince Andrew, in the UK.

While we only know at this stage that Andrew was arrested on suspicion of "misconduct in public office," the Thames Valley Police previously said they were looking at claims that Andrew shared sensitive information with Epstein while serving as the UK's trade envoy in the early 2000s. Andrew has denied all allegations of misconduct related to Epstein, and his name appearing in the files is not evidence of wrongdoing.

And there's more than just Andrew's arrest on the international stage. The Epstein files that the administration were ultimately forced to release have proven to be of great interest in Europe, where we've seen a criminal charge against another high-profile figure and investigations in at least three other countries besides the UK.

Norway's former prime minister Thorbjørn Jagland was charged last week with "aggravated corruption" after investigators said they were probing "whether gifts, travel and loans were received in connection with his position." Jagland has denied "all charges."

UK police have also searched two properties linked to former ambassador to the US Peter Mandelson, amid accusations of Mandelson sharing market-sensitive government information with Epstein while he was business secretary of the UK.

Norwegian police are also investigating a prominent diplomat.

Prosecutors in Paris opened two new investigations into potential sex abuse and financial wrongdoing related to Epstein on Wednesday, according to the Associated Press.

Latvia has also opened a human trafficking investigation linked to the files' release.

We have yet to see where these investigations lead. The laws in European countries are also different than in the United States. And in some cases, the investigation is not necessarily linked to sexual misconduct — allegations that can be notoriously difficult to prove.

But it's become clear that authorities in other countries see plenty of potential misconduct unearthed by the files in a way American authorities initially claimed they didn't, and it's leading to a reckoning across the pond.

It's also worth noting that the FBI memo's assurance has wobbled even domestically.

Despite the assurance that nothing warranted further investigation, Attorney General Pam Bondi nonetheless announced in November that the Justice Department would investigate Epstein's relationships with prominent Democrats like Bill Clinton. The announcement came after Trump called for such probes. Bill Clinton has repeatedly denied wrongdoing related to Epstein.

Fast forward to last week, when Bondi signaled during testimony to the House Judiciary Committee that more investigations were happening.

Asked "whether another individual will be indicted and prosecuted," Bondi replied: "We have pending investigations in our office."

Jay Clayton, the US attorney for the Southern District of New York, seemed to throw some cold water on Bondi's comments Wednesday, suggesting there were no active investigations. But Bondi has now said there were Epstein-related investigations twice since the FBI assured the public that there was no evidence to warrant them.

Those assurances went beyond the memo, too. In testimony to the House in September, FBI Director Kash Patel said DOJ had released "all credible information."

Patel added that there were "no investigative leads that were credible to prosecute and investigate any others." And he suggested the Obama and Biden administrations had agreed with that assessment.

It's fair to point out that Bondi and Patel are only responsible for enforcing domestic law, and that could have been what the FBI statement was referencing.

Still, Bondi's confirmations of further domestic investigations are awkward in that context. She's also repeatedly said things about the Epstein files that seemed convenient in the moment, regardless of how true they were. (Think: supposedly having the Epstein client list on her desk.) There is little evidence of robust investigations involving Bill Clinton or anyone else.

At the very least, the developments of the past few weeks betray the very different views on Epstein accountability between the US and Europe. Prosecutors in the UK and Norway especially seem to feel compelled to hold the powerful accountable, while the Trump administration's animating principle since the middle of 2025 has been "time to move on" — a view most bluntly conveyed by the president himself, who keeps calling the Epstein files a "hoax."

The problem with that latter approach is that, in your haste to assure there's nothing to see here, you can miss something quite substantial. And when you're forced to release the files you tried so hard not to release, that evidence can undermine your hard-and-fast claims about what it said.

That breeds distrust regarding any future assertions you make about the files — a persistent problem the Trump administration hasn't been able to shake.

The contrasting levels of accountability across the Atlantic threatens to add to those difficulties.
